:orphan:

.. _rails_migration:

Ruby on Rails
-------------

This section investigates how to migrate multi-tenant Rails applications
to a Citus storage backend. We'll use the `activerecord-multi-tenant
<https://github.com/citusdata/activerecord-multi-tenant>`__ Ruby gem for
easier scale-out.

This Ruby gem has evolved from our experience working with customers
scaling out their multi-tenant apps. It patches some restrictions
that ActiveRecord and Rails currently have when it comes to automatic
query building. It is based on the excellent `acts\_as\_tenant
<https://github.com/ErwinM/acts_as_tenant>`__ library, and extends it
for the particular use-case of a distributed multi-tenant database like
Citus.

Preparing to scale-out a multi-tenant application
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Initially you’ll often start out with all tenants placed on a single
database node, and using a framework like Ruby on Rails and ActiveRecord
to load the data for a given tenant when you serve a web request that
returns the tenant’s data.

ActiveRecord makes a few assumptions about the data storage that limit
your scale-out options. In particular, ActiveRecord introduces a pattern
where you normalize data and split it into many distinct models each
identified by a single ``id`` column, with multiple ``belongs_to``
relationships that tie objects back to a tenant or customer:

.. code-block:: ruby

  # typical pattern with multiple belongs_to relationships

  class Customer < ActiveRecord::Base
    has_many :sites
  end
  class Site < ActiveRecord::Base
    belongs_to :customer
    has_many :page_views
  end
  class PageView < ActiveRecord::Base
    belongs_to :site
  end

The tricky thing with this pattern is that in order to find all page
views for a customer, you'll have to query for all of a customer's sites
first. This becomes a problem once you start sharding data, and in
particular when you run UPDATE or DELETE queries on nested models like
page views in this example.

There are a few steps you can take today, to make scaling out easier in
the future:

**1. Introduce a column for the tenant\_id on every record that belongs
to a tenant**

In order to scale out a multi-tenant model, it's essential you can locate
all records that belong to a tenant quickly. The easiest way to achieve
this is to simply add a ``tenant_id`` column (or “customer\_id” column,
etc) on every object that belongs to a tenant, and backfilling your
existing data to have this column set correctly.

When you move to a distributed multi-tenant database like Citus in the
future, this will be a required step - but if you've done this before,
you can simply COPY over your data, without doing any additional data
modification.

**2. Use UNIQUE constraints which include the tenant\_id**

Unique and foreign-key constraints on values other than the tenant\_id
will present a problem in any distributed system, since it’s difficult
to make sure that no two nodes accept the same unique value. Enforcing
the constraint would require expensive scans of the data across all
nodes.

To solve this problem, for the models which are logically related
to a store (the tenant for our app), you should add store\_id to
the constraints, effectively scoping objects unique inside a given
store. This helps add the concept of tenancy to your models, thereby
making the multi-tenant system more robust.

For example, Rails creates a primary key by default, that only includes
the ``id`` of the record:

::

  Indexes:
      "page_views_pkey" PRIMARY KEY, btree (id)

You should modify that primary key to also include the tenant\_id:

.. code-block:: sql

  ALTER TABLE page_views DROP CONSTRAINT page_views_pkey;
  ALTER TABLE page_views ADD PRIMARY KEY(id, customer_id);

An exception to this rule might be an email or username column on a
users table (unless you give each tenant their own login page), which is
why, once you scale out, we typically recommend these to be split out
from your distributed tables and placed as a local table on the Citus
coordinator node.

**3. Include the tenant\_id in all queries, even when you can locate an
object using its own object\_id**

The easiest way to run a typical SQL query in a distributed system
without restrictions is to always access data that lives on a single
node, determined by the tenant you are accessing.

For this reason, once you use a distributed system like Citus, we
recommend you always specify both the tenant\_id and an object’s own ID
for queries, so the coordinator can locate your data quickly, and can
route the query to a single shard - instead of going to each shard in
the system individually and asking the shard whether it knows the given
object\_id.

Updating the Rails Application
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can get started by including ``gem 'activerecord-multi-tenant'``
into your Gemfile, running ``bundle install``, and then annotating your
ActiveRecord models like this:

.. code-block:: ruby

  class PageView < ActiveRecord::Base
    multi_tenant :customer
    # ...
  end

In this case ``customer`` is the tenant model, and your ``page_views``
table needs to have a ``customer_id`` column that references the
customer the page view belongs to.

The `activerecord-multi-tenant
<https://github.com/citusdata/activerecord-multi-tenant>`__ Gem aims to
make it easier to implement the above data changes in a typical Rails
application.

As mentioned in the beginning, by adding ``multi_tenant :customer``
annotations to your models, the library automatically takes care of
including the tenant\_id with all queries.

In order for that to work, you’ll always need to specify which tenant
you are accessing, either by specifying it on a per-request basis:

.. code-block:: ruby

  class ApplicationController < ActionController::Base
    # Opt-into the "set_current_tenant" controller helpers by specifying this:
    set_current_tenant_through_filter

    before_filter :set_customer_as_tenant

    def set_customer_as_tenant
      customer = Customer.find(session[:current_customer_id])
      set_current_tenant(customer) # Set the tenant
    end
  end

Or by wrapping your code in a block, e.g. for background and maintenance
tasks:

.. code-block:: ruby

  customer = Customer.find(session[:current_customer_id])
  # ...
  MultiTenant.with(customer) do
    site = Site.find(params[:site_id])

    # Modifications automatically include tenant_id
    site.update! last_accessed_at: Time.now

    # Queries also include tenant_id automatically
    site.page_views.count
  end

Once you are ready to use a distributed multi-tenant database like
Citus, all you need is a few adjustments to your migrations, and you're
good to go:

.. code-block:: ruby

  class InitialTables < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def up
      create_table :page_views, partition_key: :customer_id do |t|
        t.references :customer, null: false
        t.references :site, null: false

        t.text :url, null: false
        ...
        t.timestamps null: false
      end
      create_distributed_table :page_views, :account_id
    end

    def down
      drop_table :page_views
    end
  end

Note the ``partition_key: :customer_id``, something that's
added to Rails' ``create_table`` by our library, which ensures
that the primary key includes the tenant\_id column, as well as
``create_distributed_table`` which enables Citus to scale out the data
to multiple nodes.

Example Application
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are interested in a more complete
example, check out our `reference app
<https://github.com/citusdata/citus-example-ad-analytics>`__ that
showcases a simplified sample SaaS application for ad analytics.

.. image:: ../images/rails-ref-app.png

As you can see in the screenshot, most data is associated to the
currently logged in customer - even though this is complex analytical
data, all data is accessed in the context of a single customer or
tenant.
