Scalable Real-time Product Search using PostgreSQL with Citus
=============================================================

(Copy of `original publication <https://www.citusdata.com/blog/2016/04/28/scalable-product-search/>`__)

.. NOTE::

   This article mentions the Citus Cloud service.  We are no longer onboarding
   new users to Citus Cloud on AWS. If youâ€™re new to Citus, the good news is,
   Citus is still available to you: as open source, and in the cloud on
   Microsoft Azure, as a fully-integrated deployment option in Azure Database
   for PostgreSQL.

   See :ref:`cloud_topic`.

Product search is a common, yet sometimes challenging use-case for
online retailers and marketplaces. It typically involves a combination
of full-text search and filtering by attributes which differ for every
product category. More complex use-cases may have many sellers that
offer the same product, but with a different price and different
properties.

PostgreSQL has the functionality required to build a product search
application, but performs poorly when indexing and querying large
catalogs. With Citus, PostgreSQL can distribute tables and parallelize
queries across many servers, which lets you scale out memory and compute
power to handle very large catalogs. While the search functionality is
not as comprehensive as in dedicated search solutions, a huge benefit of
keeping the data in PostgreSQL is that it can be updated in real-time
and tables can be joined. This post will go through the steps of setting
up an experimental products database with a parallel search function
using PostgreSQL and Citus, with the goal of showcasing several powerful
features.

We start by setting up a :ref:`multi-node Citus cluster on
EC2 <production>` using 4 m3.2xlarge instances as
workers. An even easier way to get started is to use `Citus Cloud
<https://www.citusdata.com/cloud>`__, which gives you a managed Citus
cluster with full auto-failover. The main table in our `database schema
<https://gist.github.com/marcocitus/fb49a20404f5fa8d4ff16c25ce04599c>`__
is the "product" table, which contains the name and description
of a product, its price, and attributes in `JSON format
<http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/datatype-json.html>`__ such
that different types of products can use different attributes:

.. code:: sql

    CREATE TABLE product (
      product_id int primary key,
      name text not null,
      description text not null,
      price decimal(12,2),
      attributes jsonb
    );

To distribute the table using Citus, we call the functions for
:ref:`ddl` the table into 16 shards (one per physical core). The shards
are distributed and replicated across the 4 workers.

.. code:: sql

    SELECT create_distributed_table('product', 'product_id');

We create a `GIN
index <http://blog.2ndquadrant.com/jsonb-type-performance-postgresql-9-4/>`__
to allow fast filtering of attributes by the JSONB containment operator.
For example, a search query for English books might have the following
expression:
``attributes @> '{"category":"books", "language":"english"}'``, which
can use the GIN index.

.. code:: sql

    CREATE INDEX attributes_idx ON product USING GIN (attributes jsonb_path_ops);

To filter products by their name and description, we use the `full text
search
functions <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/textsearch.html>`__
in PostgreSQL to find a match with a user-specified query. A text search
operation is performed on a text search vector (tsvector) using a text
search query (tsquery). It can be useful to define an intermediate
function that generates the tsvector for a product. The
product\_text\_search function below combines the name and description
of a product into a tsvector, in which the name is assigned the highest
weight (from 'A' to 'D'), such that matches with the name will show up
higher when sorting by relevance.

.. code:: postgresql

    CREATE FUNCTION product_text_search(name text, description text)
    RETURNS tsvector LANGUAGE sql IMMUTABLE AS $function$
      SELECT setweight(to_tsvector(name),'A') ||
             setweight(to_tsvector(description),'B');
    $function$;

After setting up the function, we define a GIN index on it, which speeds
up text searches on the product table.

.. code:: sql

    CREATE INDEX text_idx ON product USING GIN (product_text_search(name, description));

We don't have a large product dataset available, so instead we generate
10 million mock products (7GB) by appending random words to generate
names, descriptions, and attributes, using a `simple generator
function <https://gist.github.com/marcocitus/dd315960d5923ad3f4d26b105618ed58>`__.
This is probably not be the fastest way to generate mock data, but we're
PostgreSQL geeks :). After adding some words to the words table, we can
run:

.. code:: psql

    \COPY (SELECT * FROM generate_products(10000000)) TO '/data/base/products.tsv'

The new COPY feature in Citus can be used to load the data into the
product table. COPY for hash-partitioned tables is currently available
in the `latest version of Citus <https://github.com/citusdata/citus>`__
and in `Citus Cloud <https://www.citusdata.com/cloud>`__. A benefit of
using COPY on distributed tables is that workers can process multiple
rows in parallel. Because each shard is indexed separately, the indexes
are also kept small, which improves ingestion rate for GIN indexes.

.. code:: psql

    \COPY product FROM '/data/base/products.tsv'

The data load takes just under 7 minutes; roughly 25,000 rows/sec on
average. We also loaded data into a regular PostgreSQL table in 45
minutes (3,700 rows/sec) by creating the index after copying in the
data.

Now let's search products! Assume the user is searching for "copper
oven". We can convert the phrase into a tsquery using the
``plainto_tsquery`` function and match it to the name and description
using the ``@@`` operator. As an additional filter, we require that the
"food" attribute of the product is either "waste" or "air". We're using
very random words :). To order the query by relevance, we can use the
``ts_rank`` function, which takes the tsvector and tsquery as input.

.. code:: sql

    SELECT p.product_id, p.name, p.price
    FROM product p
    WHERE product_text_search(name, description) @@ plainto_tsquery('copper oven')
      AND (attributes @> '{"food":"waste"}' OR attributes @> '{"food":"air"}')
    ORDER BY ts_rank(product_text_search(name, description),
                     plainto_tsquery('copper oven')) DESC
    LIMIT 10;

::

    .
     product_id |         name         | price
    ------------+----------------------+-------
        2016884 | oven copper hot      | 32.33
        8264220 | rifle copper oven    | 92.11
        4021935 | argument chin rub    | 79.33
        5347636 | oven approval circle | 50.78
    (4 rows)
    
    Time: 68.832 ms (~78ms on non-distributed table)

The query above uses both GIN indexes to do a very fast look-up of a
small number of rows. A much broader search can take longer because of
the need to sort all the results by their rank. For example, the
following query has 294,000 results that it needs to sort to get the
first 10:

.. code:: sql

    SELECT p.product_id, p.name, p.price
    FROM product p
    WHERE product_text_search(name, description) @@ plainto_tsquery('oven')
      AND price < 50
    ORDER BY ts_rank(product_text_search(name, description),
                     plainto_tsquery('oven')) DESC
    LIMIT 10;

::

    .
     product_id |         name         | price
    ------------+----------------------+-------
        6295883 | end oven oven        |  7.80
        3304889 | oven punishment oven | 28.27
        2291463 | town oven oven       |  7.47
    ...
    (10 rows)
    
    Time: 2262.502 ms (37 seconds on non-distributed table)

This query gets the top 10 results from each of the 16 shards, which is
where the majority of time is spent, and the master sorts the final 160
rows. By using more machines and more shards, the number of rows that
needs to be sorted in each shard is lowered significantly, but the
amount of sorting work done by the master is still trivially small. This
means that we can get significantly lower query times by using a bigger
cluster with more shards.

In addition to products, imagine the retailer also has a marketplace
where third-party sellers can offer products at different prices. Those
offers should also show up in searches if their price is under
the maximum. A product can have many such offers. We create an
additional distributed table, which we distribute by ``product_id``
and assign the same number of shards, such that we can perform joins
on the :ref:`co-located <colocation>` product / offer tables on
``product_id``.

.. code:: sql

    CREATE TABLE offer (
      product_id int not null,
      offer_id int not null,
      seller_id int,
      price decimal(12,2),
      new bool,
      primary key(product_id, offer_id)
    );
    SELECT create_distributed_table('offer', 'product_id');

We load 5 million random offers generated using the ``generate_offers``
function and COPY. The following query searches for popcorn oven
products priced under $70, including products with offers under $70.
Offers are included in the results as an array of JSON objects.

.. code:: sql

    SELECT p.product_id, p.name, p.price, to_json(array_agg(to_json(o)))
    FROM   product p LEFT JOIN offer o USING (product_id)
    WHERE  product_text_search(p.name, p.description) @@ plainto_tsquery('popcorn oven')
      AND (p.price < 70 OR o.price < 70)
    GROUP BY p.product_id, p.name, p.description, p.price
    ORDER BY ts_rank(product_text_search(p.name, p.description),
                     plainto_tsquery('popcorn oven')) DESC
    LIMIT 10;

::

    .
     product_id |          name          | price |                                        to_json
    ------------+------------------------+-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        9354998 | oven popcorn bridge    | 41.18 | [null]
        1172380 | gate oven popcorn      | 24.12 | [{"product_id":1172380,"offer_id":4853987,"seller_id":2088,"price":55.00,"new":true}]
         985098 | popcorn oven scent     | 73.32 | [{"product_id":985098,"offer_id":5890813,"seller_id":5727,"price":67.00,"new":true}]
    ...
    (10 rows)
    
    Time: 337.441 ms (4 seconds on non-distributed tables)

Given the wide array of features available in PostgreSQL, we can keep
making further enhancements. For example, we could convert the entire
row to JSON, or add a filter to only return reasonably close matches,
and we could make sure only lowest priced offers are included in the
results. We can also start doing real-time inserts and updates in the
product and offer tables.
